Encrypted Text:
Omcha u eys iz 5 qy bupy lywipylyx nby jfuchnyrn "gulwom wlummom", uhinbyl bcab jiqylyx wihnygjils iz Dofcom Wuymul. Cn cm pyls ohfceyfs nbun uhinbyl eys qcff jlixowy u mywihx jfuchnyrn nbun gueym myhmy, mi qy wuh ummogy nbun nbcm cm nby willywn jfuchnyrn (ufnbioab, qcnb u wigjonyl cn qiofx hin nuey fiha ni wbywe nby lyguchcha 20 jimmcvcfcncym).
Nbyly uly nqi xczcwofncym qcnb nbcm gynbix. Nby zclmn cm nbun qy qyly fowes ch iol yrugjfy uvipy, nbun qy ihfs bux ni xi nby xywlsjncih 5 ncgym, von cn cm ykouffs fceyfs nbun u eys iz 24 wiofx bupy vyyh omyx, uhx nbyh nby ncgy ni jylzilg nby vlyuecha iz nby wixy qiofx vy movmnuhncuf. Nbcm cm u jlivfyg nbun bum vyyh fulayfs ipylwigy vs nby chpyhncih iz wigjonylm, qbcwb wuh jylzilg uff 26 jimmcvfy wufwofuncihm ch u gunnyl iz mywihxm.
Nby mywihx jlivfyg qcnb nby uvipy gynbix cm nbun nby gymmuay chnylwyjnyx wiofx vy fihayl nbuh nqi qilxm, uhx byhwy jylzilgcha yuwb xywlsjncih wiofx nuey u mcahczcwuhn ugiohn iz ncgy. Nby qus uliohx nbcm cm zuclfs mcgjfy, uhx nbun cm ni domn fiie un nby zclmn nqi il nblyy qilxm iz nby chnylwyjn, uhx jylzilg nby wufwofuncihm ih nbymy. Sio qcff mncff zchx nby eys, vs zchxcha nby eys nbun xywcjbylm nbimy qilxm chni u gyuhchazof jblumy, uhx wuh nbyh omy nby eys ni xywlsjn nby lymn iz nby gymmuay um sio qiofx cz sio bux ehiqh nby eys ni mnuln qcnb.
Nbcm gynbix iz vlyuecha nby Mbczn Wcjbyl cm lunbyl wogvylmigy, von wuh vy omyzof cz sio ehiq nbun cn bum vyyh omyx. Biqypyl, ch lyufcns cn cm ohfceyfs nbun um uh chnylwyjnil sio qiofx ehiq qbcwb wcjbyl bum vyyh omyx. Nbyly cm u ayhyluf gynbix zil unnuwecha uff gihiufjbuvyncw wcjbylm wuffyx zlykoyhws uhufsmcm, qbcwb cm xcmwommyx funyl.

Decrypted Text (Key: 20):
Using a key of 5 we have recovered the plaintext "marcus crassus", another high powered contempory of Julius Caesar. It is very unlikely that another key will produce a second plaintext that makes sense, so we can assume that this is the correct plaintext (although, with a computer it would not take long to check the remaining 20 possibilities).
There are two dificulties with this method. The first is that we were lucky in our example above, that we only had to do the decryption 5 times, but it is equally likely that a key of 24 could have been used, and then the time to perform the breaking of the code would be substantial. This is a problem that has been largely overcome by the invention of computers, which can perform all 26 possible calculations in a matter of seconds.
The second problem with the above method is that the message intercepted could be longer than two words, and hence performing each decryption could take a significant amount of time. The way around this is fairly simple, and that is to just look at the first two or three words of the intercept, and perform the calculations on these. You will still find the key, by finding the key that deciphers those words into a meaningful phrase, and can then use the key to decrypt the rest of the message as you would if you had known the key to start with.
This method of breaking the Shift Cipher is rather cumbersome, but can be useful if you know that it has been used. However, in reality it is unlikely that as an interceptor you would know which cipher has been used. There is a general method for attacking all monoalphabetic ciphers called frequency analysis, which is discussed later. 
